>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 21:
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS TURN OUT
IN NEW YORK CITY AND AROUND THE
WORLD TO DEMAND ACTION TO HALT
CLIMATE CHANGE.
A NEW MISSION TO MARS.
MILES O'BRIEN EXPLAINS WHY IT
MATTERS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM HUNGARY, THE RISE OF A FAR
RIGHT PARTY PLEDGING A CRACKDOWN
AGAINST THE ROMAS-- OR GYPSIES.
>> (translated): THERE WERE SO
MANY POLICEMEN YOU COULDN'T
MOVE.
THEY JUST KEPT SAYING, "OUT!
OUT!"
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WORLD LEADERS ARE GATHERING IN
NEW YORK FOR A CLIMATE SUMMIT AT
THE UNITED NATIONS ON TUESDAY.
AND TODAY, HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF DEMONSTRATORS GATHERED IN
CITIES AROUND THE WORLD TO
DEMAND FASTER ACTION TO REDUCE
CARBON EMISSIONS.
LAST WEEK, THE NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION
SAID THIS SUMMER WAS THE HOTTEST
ON RECORD AND THAT THIS YEAR IS
LIKELY TO BE THE HOTTEST EVER.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ABOUT ALL THIS
IN A MOMENT.
SECURITY HAS BEEN STEPPED UP
OUTSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE.
FOLLOWING FRIDAY NIGHT'S
INCIDENT WHEN AN INTRUDER MADE
IT OVER THE FENCE ALONG
PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE, THEN RACED
ACROSS THE LAWN AND ACTUALLY GOT
JUST INSIDE THE BUILDING BEFORE
BEING TACKLED AND ARRESTED.
OFFICIALS IDENTIFIED THE
INTRUDER AS 42-YEAR-OLD OMAR J.
GONZALEZ, A VETERAN, WHO HAD
DONE THREE TOURS IN IRAQ.
INITIALLY, OFFICIALS SAID HE WAS
NOT ARMED.
THEY NOW SAY HE WAS CARRYING A
SMALL FOLDING KNIFE WITH A
THREE-AND-A-HALF-INCH SERRATED
BLADE.
LATE YESTERDAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ISSUED A STATEMENT EXPRESSING
COMPLETE CONFIDENCE IN THE
SECRET SERVICE.
THE FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF
CORRECTIONS HAS FIRED 32 GUARDS
FOR THEIR ALLEGED ROLE IN THE
DEATHS OF INMATES AT FOUR STATE
PRISONS.
THE GUARDS ARE ACCUSED OF
CRIMINAL MISCONDUCT OR
WRONGDOING.
ALL THIS, ACCORDING TO THE MIAMI
HERALD, WHICH HAS BEEN
INVESTIGATING THE INCIDENTS.
THE TEAMSTERS UNION, WHICH
REPRESENTS THE OFFICERS, CALLED
THE FIRINGS A MASSACRE AND SAID
THE GUARDS HAD NOT BEEN AFFORDED
DUE PROCESS.
GENERAL MOTORS IS RECALLING MORE
THAN 200,000 CARS BECAUSE OF A
PARKING BRAKE DEFECT THAT THE
COMPANY WARNS COULD LEAD TO
FIRES.
THE RECALL COVERS THE 2014-15
CHEVY IMPALA AND THE 2013-2015
CADILLAC XTS.
G.M. SAYS IT DOES NOT KNOW OF
ANY CRASHES, INJURIES OR DEATHS
CAUSED BY THE PROBLEM.
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE,
REPUBLICAN MIKE ROGERS OF
MICHIGAN, VOICED CONCERN TODAY
THAT PRESIDENT OBAMA'S ANNOUNCED
INTENTION NOT TO SEND GROUND
TROOPS TO FIGHT ISIS IS
FRUSTRATING MILITARY LEADERS.
>> WE SHOULD LAY OUT OUR BATTLE
PLANS BUT WE SHOULDN'T TAKE
ANYTHING OFF OUR BATTLE PLANS.
I THINK WHAT YOU'RE SEEING NOW
IS A FRUSTRATION.
FRUSTRATION ON A MILITARY
PERSPECTIVE, SAYING PLEASE DON'T
LIMIT US ON WHAT WE NEED TO DO
TO DEFEAT THIS TERRORIST GROUP.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT THE FORMER
CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS,
RETIRED ADMIRAL MIKE MULLEN,
SAID REPORTS OF A RIFT BETWEEN
THE PRESIDENT AND THE PENTAGON
HAVE BEEN BLOWN OUT OF
PROPORTION.
>> I DON'T KNOW ANY LEADERS,
MILITARY OR CIVILIAN, WHO ARE
TALKING ABOUT BRIGADE SIZED
UNITS, 4,000, 10,000 AT A CRACK.
WE CERTAINLY LEARNED IN THESE
WARS THAT IT'S IMPORTANT TO HAVE
INDIGENOUS FORCES ON THE GROUND
AND OUR ABILITY TO TRAIN AND
SUPPORT THEM HAS MADE A
DIFFERENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HEAD OF THE
TURKISH DISASTER AGENCY SAID
TODAY 100,000 PEOPLE, MOSTLY
SYRIAN KURDS, HAVE FLED INTO
TURKEY DURING THE PAST WEEK, AS
ISIS TROOPS ADVANCE TOWARD A KEY
SYRIAN BORDER TOWN.
THE UNITED NATIONS SAYS IT IS
PREPARING FOR THE ARRIVAL OF
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF OTHERS.
ACROSS THE BORDER IN TURKEY
TODAY, CLASHES ERUPTED BETWEEN
TURKISH SECURITY FORCES AND
TURKISH KURDS TRYING TO HEAD
INTO SYRIA TO CONFRONT THE ISIS
EXTREMISTS.
THE POPE TRAVELED TODAY TO
ALBANIA, A PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM
NATION, WHERE HE ACCUSED
EXTREMISTS OF PERVERTING
RELIGION TO JUSTIFY VIOLENCE.
IN AN APPARENT REFERENCE TO
ISIS, HE SAID:
>> (translated): LET NO ONE
THINK YOU CAN USE THE SHIELD OR
GOD WHILE PLANNING AND
COMMITTING ACTS OF VIOLENCE AND
OPPRESSION.
LET NO ONE USE RELIGION AS A
PRETEXT FOR ACTIONS THAT
CONTRADICT HUMAN DIGNITY AND
FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN AFGHANISTAN
TODAY, A POLITICAL BREAKTHROUGH,
NEARLY SIX MONTHS AFTER THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, THE TOP
VOTE-GETTER, ASHRAF GHANI, ON
THE LEFT, AGREED TO SHARE POWER
WITH THE RUNNER UP, ABDULLAH
ABDULLAH.
THE DEAL WAS STRUCK ONLY AFTER
AFGHAN OFFICIALS AGREED NOT TO
RELEASE THE FINAL ELECTION
TALLY, WHICH ABDULLAH SAID WAS
SO TAINTED THAT IT SHOULD NEVER
BE MADE PUBLIC.
AND ZOO OFFICIALS IN THE CZECH
REPUBLIC MARKED WORLD RHINO DAY.
BY SETTING FIRE TO MORE THAN 100
POUNDS OF RHINO HORNS IN AN
EFFORT TO HIGHLIGHT THE
ENDANGERED STATUS OF THE
ANIMALS.
POACHERS KILL THE ANIMALS THEN
SELL THE HORNS, WHICH, FOR
CENTURIES, HAVE BEEN PRIZED IN
ASIA FOR USE IN TRADITIONAL
MEDICINES.
>> Sreenivasan: AS WE JUST
REPORTED, HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE MARCHED TODAY IN NEW
YORK AND IN OTHER CITIES AROUND
THE WORLD DEMANDING THAT WORLD
LEADERS DO MORE TO HALT CLIMATE
CHANGE.
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED BY
KATHERINE BAGLEY.
SHE IS A REPORTER WITH INSIDE
CLIMATE NEWS.
GETTING IN TODAY'S MARCH WHERE
HAVE THE WORLD WHEN IT COMES TO
TAKING ACTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE?
>> THERE IS NO GLOBAL AGREEMENTS
ON WHAT TO DO ABOUT CLIMATE
CHANGE WHICH IS ONE OF THE
THINGS WE WILL BE HASHING OUT ON
TUESDAY AT THE UN, BUT A LOT OF
INDIVIDUAL COUNTRIES HAVE --
HAVE DECIDED TO TAKE ACTION
THEMSELVES AND A LOT OF THE
ACTIONS HAVE BEEN IN EUROPE, A
LOT OF EUROPEAN COUNTRIES ARE
REALLY ON TOP OF THIS.
A LOT OF THE ISLAND NAMES,
MALDIVES THAT ARE LITERALLY
DISAPPEARING INTO THE ACTION
ARE, INTO THE OCEAN ARE TAKING
ACTION, BUT THERE ARE A LOT OF
CARBON DIOXIDE POLLUTERS THAT
ARE, THAT DON'T HAVE A NATIONAL
INITIATIVE ON WORLD CHANGE,
CHINA HASN'T DONE
RUSSIA, INDIA, A LOT OF
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO PAY
ATTENTION TO THE BIG COUNTRIES
TO SEE HOW COMMITTED THEY ARE ON
THIS BECAUSE THEY HAVEN'T REALLY
BEEN IN THE PAST.
>> SO YOU ARE OUT THERE IN THE
MARCH.
YOU HAVE BEEN COVERING THIS FOR
A WHILE, IS THERE ORGANIZING
THAT WENT INTO IT, WHAT IS THE
THE PURPOSE OF TODAY'S MARCH?
>> IT IS JUST TO SHOW HOW WE
WANT THEM TO ACT ON CLIMATE
CHANGE.
THEY DIDN'T HAVE A SET DEMAND.
THEY JUST WANTED TO SHOW LEADERS
HOW MANY PEOPLE WANT ACTION, ANY
ACTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> AND WHO ARE ALL OF THESE
DIFFERENT GROUPS?
>> I MEAN YOU SAID THERE ARE
HUNDREDS JUST ORGANIZED IN THIS
PARTICULAR EVENT.
>> SO, THERE WERE TWO MAIN
GROUPS THAT ORGANIZED ABBAS AND
360.ORG BUT THEY HAD 1,500
DIFFERENT ORGANIZATIONS.
THEY STARTED BACK IN JANUARY AND
THIS MARCH HAS JUST GROWN BEYOND
EXPECTATIONS AND EVEN IN THE
LAST MONTH IT WENT FROM 750
ORGANIZATIONS TO 1,500
ORGANIZATIONS IN JUST A COUPLE
OF WEEKS.
>> AND IT IS NOT JUST
ENVIRONMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS THAT
ARE PARTICIPATING?
>> NO THAT IS WHAT MAKES THE
MARCH SO REMARKABLE IS THAT 8?
THE FIRST TIME IN A CLIMATE
VISUAL DEMONSTRATION OF HOW MANY
PEOPLE FROM SO MANY DIFFERENT
ORGANIZATIONS REALLY CARE ABOUT
THIS.
THERE ARE A LOT OF LABOR GROUPS
THAT ARE INVOLVED, HIGH SCHOOL
GROUPS THAT ARE COMING IN,
DIFFERENT UNIVERSITIES, BUT YOU
ALSO HAVE PARENTS WITH YOUNG
KIDS AND FAITH BASED GROUPS AND
A LOT OF SOCIAL AND RACIAL
EQUALITY GROUPS ARE COMING IN,
AND I THINK THE BIG THING HAS
BEEN THE REALIZATION THAT
CLIMATE CHANGE ISN'T JUST
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUE.
IT IS AN ECONOMIC ISSUE, A
SOCIAL EQUALITY ISSUE.
IT IS A LABOR ISSUE.
IT IS KIND OF EVERYBODY'S ISSUE.
>> AND DO YOU SEE ANY BUSINESS
GROUPS INVOLVED OR SPONSORING OR
INVOLVED IN THIS TOO?
>> THERE ARE A FEW SMALL
BUSINESSES INVOLVED, AND NOT
JUST IN THE I HAVE BUT A FEW
COMPANIES THAT GOT INVOLVED.
>> SO HOW DO THEY HOPE TO CHANGE
THE CONVERSATION HEADING INTO
THE PARIS DISCUSSION A YEAR FROM
NOW? BECAUSE EVEN BAN KEY MOON
THE HEAD OF THE UN SAID WE
DIDN'T GET ENOUGH ACCOMPLISHED
IN COPENHAGEN.
>> WHAT IS THE AGENDA THERE?
>> THE AGENDA TUESDAY IS THEY
WANT TO LAY THE GROUND WORK.
SO THEY WILL BE TALKING ABOUT
HOW TO ACTUALLY PASSAGE .. THE
WHOSE CARBON REDUCTION TARGETS
AND THE TRICK IS GETTING TARGETS
AND GETTING IMPROVEMENTS AT ALL
ALL OF THE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES
CAN ACTUALLY AGREE ON, YOU KNOW,
YOU HAVE
COUNTRIES THAT DIDN'T EXACT
CONTRIBUTE TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND
THEY WILL HAVE TO MAKE THE SAM
AGREEMENTS THAT DEVELOPED WORLD
COUNTRIES WILL HAVE TO.
THERE IS ALSO GOING TO BE A LOT
OF TALK ABOUT GLOBAL CLIMATE
CHANGE FINANCE, DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES SETTING ASIDE
BUILDINGS OF DOLLARS TO HELP
THOSE DEVELOPING ORGANIZATIONS,
THAT ARE OFTEN THE HARDEST HIT
WITH CLIMATE CHANGE.
IS TO SET ASIDE TO HELP THEM
ADAPT TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND DEAL
WITH THE RISKS.
>> ALL RIGHT, KATHERINE BAGLEY,
A REPORTER WITH INSIDE
ENVIRONMENT NEWS.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
OUR IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND
THE NATION AND AROUND THE WORLD.
LAST WEEK, WE REPORTED FROM
FRANCE ON GROWING ANTI-SEMITISM
THERE.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE YOU TO HUNGARY,
WHERE ANOTHER LONG-PERSECUTED
GROUP-- THE ROMAS, OR GYPSIES--
ARE ALSO COMING UNDER FIRE.
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT STEPHEN
FEE TRAVELED THERE RECENTLY AND
HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: JUST A TWO-HOUR
DRIVE EAST OF THE CAPITAL
BUDAPEST, MISKOLC IS HUNGARY'S
THIRD LARGEST CITY WITH 160
THOUSANDS RESIDENTS.
AND ON ITS OUTSKIRTS THIS
SUMMER, WE MET 55-YEAR-OLD
JOZSEFNE NAGY IN THE COURTYARD
OF HER FORMER HOME.
NAGY, HER DAUGHTER, AND THREE
GRANDCHILDREN LIVED IN THIS
CITY-OWNED APARTMENT FOR THREE
YEARS UNTIL THEY WERE EVICTED
THIS PAST AUGUST.
>> (translated): WE DIDN'T
KNOW WE'D HAVE TO LEAVE.
MY DAUGHTER LEFT IN THE MORNING
TO GO FOR HER JOB TRAINING
PROGRAM.
SHE WENT TO SCHOOL AND THE KIDS
WERE HERE, AND I GET A CALL FROM
THE NEIGHBORS THAT THEY'RE
MOVING MY DAUGHTER OUT.
KIDS AND ALL.
>> Reporter: NAGY RUSHED HOME TO
A CHAOTIC SCENE.
A NEWSPAPER PHOTO FROM THAT DAY
SHOWS MEN HAULING THE FAMILY'S
BELONGINGS OUTSIDE.
>> (translated): THERE WERE SO
MANY POLICEMEN YOU COULDN'T
MOVE.
THEY JUST KEPT SAYING, "OUT!
OUT!"
I REPEATEDLY TOLD THEM WE DON'T
HAVE ANY DEBTS, BUT THEY JUST
KEPT REPEATING THEMSELVES.
>> Reporter: AND SHE'S NOT THE
ONLY ONE FACING EVICTION.
CITY OFFICIALS PLAN TO DEMOLISH
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD OF AROUND A
THOUSAND PEOPLE, WHETHER THE
TENANTS HAVE PAID THEIR RENT OR
NOT.
>> (translated): THE PEOPLE
WHO LIVE THERE ARE POOR, AND
USERS AND DRUG DEALERS HAVE
APPEARED, WHICH IS SOMETHING THE
CITY MUST DEAL WITH IN SOME
SHAPE OR FORM.
>> Reporter: BUT NAGY SAYS SHE
AND HER NEIGHBORS ARE BEING
THROWN OUT FOR A DIFFERENT
REASON.
>> (translated): THE GOAL
WASN'T TO EVICT THOSE WHO DON'T
PAY, BUT TO EVICT GYPSIES.
>> Reporter: HERE IN WHAT WAS
ONCE HUNGARY'S INDUSTRIAL
HEARTLAND, THE VAST MAJORITY OF
MISKOLC'S GYPSY, OR ROMA
POPULATION IS UNEMPLOYED.
THE EVICTIONS ARE THE LATEST
CHAPTER IN A HISTORY STRAINED
RELATIONS WITH THEIR NON-ROMA
NEIGHBORS.
IT'S A TENSION THAT'S HARDLY
UNIQUE TO MISKOLC, OR EVEN
HUNGARY.
SINCE THEIR ANCESTORS ARRIVED IN
EUROPE FROM INDIA SOME 600 YEARS
AGO, ROMA PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
ENSLAVED, EXPELLED, AND
ETHNICALLY CLEANSED.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS WERE
SLAUGHTERED DURING WORLD WAR
II.
MORE RECENTLY, FRANCE DEPORTED
THOUSANDS OF ROMA WHO OVERSTAYED
VISA REQUIREMENTS IN 2010.
THE E.U.'S JUSTICE MINISTER
CALLED THE EXPULSIONS '¡A
DISGRACE.'
FEARS OF CRIME HAVE MOTIVATED
ANTI-ROMA FEELINGS ACROSS
EUROPE.
AND HEADLINES ABOUT ROMA
CRIMINAL RINGS HELP DRIVE THOSE
PERCEPTIONS.
>> ACROSS EUROPE, THOUSANDS OF
CHILDREN ARE BEING FORCED ON TO
THE STREETS TO BEG AND STEAL.
>> Reporter: A 2009 B.B.C.
DOCUMENTARY CALLED "GYPSY CHILD
THIEVES" FOCUSED ON ROMA
PICKPOCKETS.
BUT UNLIKE THOSE CASES, ROMA IN
HUNGARY AREN'T MIGRANTS, THEY'RE
CITIZENS, AND IN HUNGARY, FEARS
OF ROMA CRIMINALITY HAVE DRIVEN
THE POPULARITY OF A NATIONALIST
POLITICAL PARTY CALLED JOBBIK.
FOUNDED JUST TEN YEARS AGO, THE
PARTY NETTED 20% OF THE VOTE IN
THIS YEAR'S PARLIAMENTARY
ELECTIONS.
THE GROUP DESCRIBES ITSELF AS A
PRINCIPLED, CONSERVATIVE, AND
RADICALLY PATRIOTIC CHRISTIAN
PARTY.
>> THROUGH THE PRESENCE OF A
VERY STRONG, OPENLY ANTI-ROMA
FAR-RIGHT PARTY, ANTI-ROMA TALK,
RHETORIC AND EVEN POLICIES ARE
BECOMING MAINSTREAM.
>> Reporter: THAT'S SZABOLCS
POGONYI.
HE CHAIRS THE NATIONALISM
STUDIES DEPARTMENT AT BUDAPEST'S
CENTRAL EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY.
A DISCLOSURE: I WORKED AT THE
UNIVERSITY FOR TWO YEARS.
>> THEY WERE THE FIRST PARTY
WHICH GOT INTO PARLIAMENT AND
OPENLY SPOKE ABOUT WHAT THEY
CALL AS GYPSY CRIMINALITY.
THAT IS OPENLY LINKING CRIME AND
ETHNIC BACKGROUND.
>> Reporter: THREE YEARS AGO IN
THE HUNGARIAN TOWN OF
GYONGYOSPATA, DISPUTES BETWEEN
ROMA AND NON-ROMA OVER PROPERTY
CRIME ERUPTED INTO A
CONFRONTATION.
AS THIS VIDEO FROM THE HUNGARIAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION SHOWS,
JOBBIK PARTY MEMBERS ALONG WITH
OTHER GROUPS MARCHED IN THE
STREETS.
THEY RAILED AGAINST WHAT THEY
CALLED GYPSY CRIME, PROMISING TO
PROTECT THE VILLAGERS.
CRITICS SAY IT WAS A CAMPAIGN OF
INTIMIDATION AGAINST ROMA.
POGONYI SAYS LEVELS OF ANTI-ROMA
FEELINGS IN HUNGARY HAVE BEEN
CONSISTENT SINCE THE EARLY
1990S.
BUT THE JOBBIK PARTY, HE SAYS,
IS THE FIRST POLITICAL BLOC TO
CAPITALIZE ON THOSE FEELINGS.
>> PEOPLE LIVING PARTICULARLY IN
RURAL AREAS, POOR RURAL AREAS
HAVE THE SENSE OF BEING
ABANDONED BY THE GOVERNMENT.
I MEAN, THEY FACE PETTY CRIME,
AND THEY REALIZE THAT THE
GOVERNMENT, THE AUTHORITIES DO
AND CAN DO NOTHING.
AND AT THAT POINT SOME PEOPLE
APPEAR AND THEY SAY, WE WILL
PROTECT YOU.
>> Reporter: JOBBIK LEADERS
DECLINED OUR INTERVIEW REQUESTS,
BUT ON THEIR WEBSITE, THEY
DEFEND THE TERM GYPSY CRIME,
CALLING IT A UNIQUE FORM OF
DELINQUENCY, DIFFERENT FROM THE
CRIMES OF THE MAJORITY IN NATURE
AND FORCE.
I ASKED ROMA JOURNALIST AND
ADVOCATE ERNO KADET IF THERE WAS
VALIDITY IN USING A TERM LIKE
GYPSY CRIME, ESPECIALLY WHEN
CRIME RATES ARE HIGHER IN SOME
ROMA-MAJORITY COMMUNITIES.
>> THE WAY I SEE IT THE PROBLEM
IS, AND THEY ARE PERFECTLY AWARE
OF THIS, THE JOBBIK PARTY, THAT
BY USING THE WORD GYPSY AND THE
WORD CRIME IN THE SAME SENTENCE,
IT BRANDS EVERYONE.
I DON'T THINK THERE IS A SINGLE
ROMA, A SINGLE CREDIBLE ROMA
LEADER, WHO SAYS THERE ARE NO
CRIMINALS AMONG THE ROMA
POPULATION, JUST AS THERE ARE A
SUBSTANTIAL NUMBER OF CRIMINALS
AMONG THE NON-ROMA POPULATION.
BUT THEY SAY IT'S BECAUSE OF
POVERTY, NOT BECAUSE OF
BELONGING TO A CERTAIN ETHNIC
GROUP.
>> Reporter: IN HUNGARY TODAY,
70% OF ROMA LIVE BELOW THE
POVERTY LINE AND 85% ARE
UNEMPLOYED.
GOVERNMENT SPOKESMAN AND FORMER
SOCIAL INCLUSION SECRETARY
ZOLTAN KOVACS SAYS THE COUNTRY
IS WORKING TO IMPROVE CONDITIONS
FOR ROMA BUT THOSE PLANS WILL
TAKE TIME.
>> IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO HAVE A
BREAKTHROUGH.
I MEAN, THERE'S A COMPLETE
AGREEMENT IN PROFESSIONAL
CIRCLES AS WELL AS IN POLITICS
THAT YOU HAVE TO BE VERY
CONSISTENT ACTUALLY ON APPLYING
THESE MEASURES ON THE LONG RUN.
THAT MEANS AT LEAST TEN YEARS.
THE ROMA ISSUE HAS BEEN WITH US
NOT ONLY FOR THE PAST COUPLE OF
YEARS OR DECADES IT'S A SIX
HUNDRED YEARS OLD ISSUE.
WE'VE BEEN LIVING TOGETHER WITH
THE ROMA COMMUNITIES FOR THE
PAST COUPLE OF CENTURIES.
>> Reporter: YOU KNOW, SOMEONE
MIGHT SAY IF THEY LISTEN TO THIS
INTERVIEW, THAT THE RHETORIC
THAT WE'VE BEEN LIVING WITH THE
ROMA, WITH US, THAT YOU'RE
ALREADY SEPARATING YOURSELF FROM
PEOPLE WHO ARE HUNGARIAN
CITIZENS, RIGHT?
>> IT'S AN ONGOING DEBATE
ACTUALLY, EVEN WITH THE ROMA
THEMSELVES.
THEY ALSO USE THIS TERMINOLOGY,
THAT US AND THEM, SO YOU LIKE IT
OR NOT, THIS DIFFERENTIATION ON
BOTH SIDES IS PRESENT.
>> Reporter: BACK IN MISKOLC,
DEPUTY MAYOR GYULA SCHWEICKHARDT
DESIGNED THE PLAN TO ERADICATE
THE CITY'S ROMA MAJORITY
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> (translated): WE DON'T
THINK THE QUESTION IS WHETHER
SOMEONE IS ROMA OR NOT, CITY
LEADERSHIP IS NOT APPROACHING
THIS AS AN ETHNIC OR RACIAL
ISSUE.
IT IS IN FACT SAD THAT THE ISSUE
HAS BEEN RAISED AS ONE AT ALL.
WE APPROACH IT AS AN ENDEAVOR TO
ERADICATE AN IMPOVERISHED SLUM.
>> Reporter: THE CITY ISN'T
REPLACING THE HOUSING, BUT WILL
PAY EVICTED TENANTS UP TO $8,500
TO FIND A NEW HOME.
BUT ON THE CONDITION THEY BUY
HOMES OUTSIDE THE CITY AND NOT
RETURN FOR FIVE YEARS.
ALREADY, SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES
HAVE SIGNED PETITIONS SAYING
THEY WON'T WELCOME MISKOLC'S
DISPLACED RESIDENTS.
LOCAL ROMA LEADER GABOR VARADI
CONCEDES THE ROMA NEIGHBORHOODS
HAVE THEIR SOCIAL PROBLEMS.
BUT THAT DESTROYING THEM WILL
ONLY LEAD TO CONFLICT.
>> (translated): I THINK THE
SOLUTION IS NOT TO EVICT PEOPLE
AND RELOCATE THE PROBLEM TO
ANOTHER SETTLEMENT, OR TO THROW
FAMILIES OUT INTO THE STREET.
IF WE DO THAT THE PROBLEM GETS
BIGGER AND CREATES MORE TENSION.
>> Reporter: AFTER FACING SO
MUCH DIFFICULTY, I ASKED
JOZSEFNE NAGY, EVICTED THIS
AUGUST FROM HER NEIGHBORHOOD ON
THE FRINGES OF MISKOLC, IF SHE
WANTS TO STAY HERE IN THE CITY.
>> (translated): YES,
DEFINITELY.
WE WERE BORN HERE AND WE'D LIKE
TO DIE HERE.
WE WENT TO SCHOOL HERE, WE SPENT
OUR LIFE WORKING IN THE FACTORY
HERE, AT THE WASTE PLANT.
I DON'T WANT TO LEAVE.
THE CHILDREN GO TO PRESCHOOL
HERE AND TO SCHOOL.
THEY ARE HEARTSICK, ALL OF THEM,
WE'RE TERRIFIED, LIKE EVERYONE
ELSE WHO LIVES HERE.
>> Reporter: SINCE THE EVICTION,
SHE'S MOVED IN WITH ANOTHER ONE
OF HER DAUGHTERS, ALSO IN THE
SAME NEIGHBORHOOD.
BUT WITH THE CITY PLANNING TO
BUILD A PARKING LOT HERE ONCE
DEMOLITION IS COMPLETE, NAGY'S
DAYS HERE ARE ALMOST CERTAINLY
NUMBERED.
>> SEE WHAT LIFE IS LIKE IN THE
ROMAS COMMUNITY, THE PRODUCERS
NOTEBOOK AT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
>> LATER TONIGHT, THE NASA MADE
IN SPACECRAFT IS EXPECTED TO
COMPLETE A TEN MONTH VOYAGE TO
MARS.
ONCE IT IS PLACED INTO ORBIT
NASA SCIENTISTS PLAN TO GATHER
INFORMATION ABOUT THE RED
PLANET'S ATMOSPHERE.
INFORMATION THEY HOPE WILL OFFER
CLIMATE.
FOR MORE ON THE MISSION'S
SIGNIFICANCE, YESTERDAY I SPOKE
WITH THE NEWSHOUR MILES O'BRIEN.
>> WHY ARE SPACE NUTS, MARS
NERDS SO EXCITED FOR SUNDAY
NIGHT?
>> WELL THIS IS ALL PART OF THE
BIG TAPESTRY IF YOU WILL OF
LAYING THE GROUNDWORK FOR ONE
DAY PUTTING HUMAN BOOTSMA ON
MARS.
WE HOPE.
YOU JUST DON'T FLY OFF IN A
ROCKET AND LAND THERE.
YOU NEED TO LEARN ABOUT THE
SOIL, THE GROUND, GND IN THIS
CASE THE ATMOSPHERE.
ONE OF THE BIG QUESTIONS, THE
OVERRIDING QUESTIONS WHICH
TROUBLES SCIENTISTS AND WHICH
HAS A LOT TO DO WITH FUTURE
EXPLORATION OF MARS IS WHAT
HAPPENED TO THE PLANET OVER THE
PAST 3 BILLION YEARS?
IT USED TO BE WARM AND WET, AND
NOW IT IS OFTEN DRY AND AWFULLY
COLD... WHAT HAPPENED ALONG THE
WAY?
AND UNDERSTANDING WHAT IS GOING
ON IN THE FRINGES OF THE
ATMOSPHERE, WHICH IS WHAT MAVEN
WILL DO, WILL HELP THE
SCIENTISTS LEARN, DID THE SOLAR
WINDS BLOW THE ATMOSPHERE AWAY,
IS THIS WHAT HAPPENED AS IT WENT
THERE 2 ULTIMATE CLIMATE CHANGE?
>> SO THERE ARE GOING TO BE
MULTIPLE ORBITERS AROUND THIS
PLANET IF THE UNITED STATES
SUCCESSFULLY
SATELLITE INTO THE RIGHT ORBIT
AND THEN ON TUESDAY INDIA HAS
ONE, THAT HOPEFULLY THEY WILL
SUCCEED AS WELL?
>> YES.
IF EVERYBODY SUCCEEDS, IF THE
U.S. AND MASON AND THE INDIA
SUCCEEDS WITH THEIR FIRST ENTER
PLANETARY MISSION, WHICH IS AN
EXCITING THINK THING IN ITS OWN
RIGHT .. THAT WILL PUT FIVE
CRAFT IN ORBIT AROUND MARS DOING
ALL KINDS OF WORK,
SCIENTIFICALLY.
LOOKING AT THE PLANET ITSELF,
OBTAINING IMAGERY, MASS
SPECTROMETRY, LOOKING AT THE
SOLAR WIND, IONATION, A WHOLE
HOST OF THINGS ABOUT THE
MAGNETIC FIELD AND ALSO ..
ASSISTING WHAT IS ON THE GROUND.
WE HAVE TWO ROVERS ON THE
GROUND, OPPORTUNITY AND
CURIOSITY, BOTH NASA CRAFT.
THAT ARE DOING THEIR SCIENTIFIC
WORK.
ON THE ONE HAND, THESE, SOME OF
THESE SATELLITES SERVE AS
RELAYS, COMMUNICATION RELAYS FOR
THE ROVERS ON THE GROUND AND
ALSO THE SCIENCE THEY CONDUCT ON
THE GROUND IS COMPARED TO THE
SCIENCE THAT IS DONE IN ORBIT,
AND THAT HELPS SCIENTISTS MAKE
COMPARISONS WHICH ARE USEFUL.
>> INCIDENTALLY, ON
OCTOBER 19TH, THERE IS A COMET
THAT IS GOING TO NEARLY STRIKE
MARS, AND THERE IS SOME CONCERN
THAT THESE CRAFT MIGHT, YOU
KNOW, BE IN HARM'S WAY,
FORTUNATELY THAT WON'T BE THE
CASE, BUT THERE IS A GOOD CHANCE
THEY MIGHT GET SOME IMAGERY AND
CERTAINLY SOME INTERESTING
SCIENCE ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS WHEN
A COMET ENTERS AN ATMOSPHERE.
>> SO ALL THIS INFORMATION FROM
ALL OF THESE MISSIONS MEANS
WHAT? HUMANS WILL SET FOOT ON
MARS IN A COUPLE OF DECADES?
>> THAT IS THE LONG RANGE PLAN.
THE DEVIL OF COURSE IS IN THE
DETAILS, AND OF COURSE THE
BUDGET, BUT NO ONE THINGS IT IS
A WISE IDEA TO GO TO MARS
WITHOUT LAYING THE GROUNDWORK
SCIENTIFICALLY AND ROBOTICALLY,
AND THAT IS WHAT WE HAVE BEEN
SEEING IN A SYSTEMATIC WAY FOR A
NUMBER OF YEARS NOW, YOU KNOW,
GOING BACK TO THE PATHFINDER
MISSION ON MARS.
IT IS KIND OF A TWO TRACK THING.
ON THE ONE HAND, SCIENTISTS ARE
GETTING GOALS THAT COME STRICT
STRICTLY OUT OF ROBOTIC
ANYTHING THAT HELP THEM
UNDERSTAND, ARE WE ALONE IN THE
UNIVERSE?
WAS THERE A SECOND GENESIS OF
LIFE ON MARS IS A FUNDAMENTALLY
GOOD QUESTION SEPARATE FROM
WHETHER WE PUT HUMAN BEINGS ON
THE PLANET.
BUT ULTIMATELY, THE SAME
SCIENTISTS WILL TELL YOU THAT A
GEOLOGIST ON THE GROUND WITH A
HAMMER AND THE ABILITY TO CHIP A
ROCKAWAY HERE AND THERE CAN DO
IN A MATTER OF HOURS WHAT ROBOT
WOULD TAKE WEEKS TO DO.
SO THE IDEA THAT SCIENTISTS MAY
ONE DAY BE THERE ON THE GROUND
MAY BE THE ONLY WAY THAT WILL
ANSWER ALL OF THESE BIG
SCIENTIFIC QUESTIONS AND PLUS IT
IS A BIG PART OF THE OVERALL
PICTURE OF EXPLORING THE COSMOS
AND WONDERING IF, IN FACT, HUMAN
BEINGS ARE EVER GOING TO LEAVE
THIS PLANET IN A MEANINGFUL WAY.
>> ALL RIGHT, MILES O'BRIEN,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> YOU ARE WELCOME, HARI.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> A PROGRAMMING NOTE, TOMORROW
NIGHT THE PBS DOCUMENTARY SERIES
POV DEBUTS KOCH, A LOOK AT NEW
YORK'S COLORFUL THREE TERM MAYOR
WHO DIED LAST YEAR.
HERE IS AN EXCERPT SHOWING HOW
KOCH DEALT WITH THE TRANSIT
STRIKE IN 1980.
>> I LOOK OUT THE WINDOW AND IT
OVERLOOKS THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE.
I SEE THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
WALKING ACROSS THE BRIDGE.
AND I SAY TO BOB, I AM GOING TO
TO GO DOWNSTAIRS.
I DIDN'T SAY WHY.
HI EVERYBODY.
AND THEY FOLLOW ME AS I WALK
TOWARDS THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE.
AND AS I GET ON TO THE BRIDGE IT
WAS LIKE SOMETHING TOOK OVER AND
I STARTED TO YELL, KEEP WALKING,
KEEP WALKING OVER THE BRIDGE, WE
ARE NOT GOING TO LET THESE
BASTARDS BRING US TO OUR KNEES.
THANK YOU.
I REALLY APPRECIATE YOUR
COMING TO WORK TODAY.
>> THIS IS RIDICULOUS, I HAVE TO
GO TO WORK AT YONKERS.
>> 28th STREET.
WHAT IS THE SINGLE BIGGEST
FACTOR TO GO MORE SMOOTHLY?
>> IT IS A DIFFERENT MAYOR,
FIRSTLY.
>> WE ARE NOT GOING TO TAKE
THIS FROM A COUPLE OF WHACKOS.
>> NEW YORK WAS A CITY NOT JUST
BROKE, IT WAS DEPRESSED.
>> AND HERE COMES KOCH WHO WAS
REAL CHEERLEADER FOR THE CITY.
OF, YOU KNOW, YOU DON'T HAVE TO
JUST ROLL OVER AND PLAY DEAD.
THIS IS THE BIG APPLE.
THIS IS NEW YORK.
>> DON'T STOP OR I WILL HAVE TO
GIVE YOU A TICKET.
OKAY?
>> AM I DOING ALL RIGHT?
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT, EVERYBODY.
THANK YOU!
>> SOME LATE NEWS BEFORE WE
LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
EVEN AS DEMONSTRATORS AROUND THE
WORLD CALLED FOR FASTER ACTION
ON CLIMATE CHANGE, SCIENTISTS
REPORTED TODAY THAT GLOBAL
CARBON EMISSIONS ROSE ANOTHER
2.3 PERCENT LAST YEAR TO RECORD
LEVELS.
THOUSANDS TURNED OUT IN MOSCOW
FOR AN ANTI-WAR RALLY, THEY WERE
PROTESTING THE KREMLIN'S
INVOLVEMENT IN UKRAINE.
AND IT HAS BEEN A VIOLENT
WEEKEND IN CHICAGO, AT LEAST 28
PEOPLE WERE SHOT AND TWO OF THEM
DIED.
ONE OF THOSE WOUNDED WAS A
12-YEAR-OLD BOY.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW AT THE NEWSHOUR.
WE WILL REPORT FROM FLORIDA ON
THE MOST EXPENSIVE RACE FOR
GOVERNOR IN THE COUNTRY.
THAT IS IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.